README.md, before:

# Java Design Patterns Collection

A comprehensive collection of Java Design Patterns with detailed documentation and working examples.

## Overview

This project demonstrates the 23 Gang of Four Design Patterns with:
- **Detailed Javadoc documentation** explaining each pattern's purpose, structure, and benefits
- **Real-world examples** showing practical applications
- **Comprehensive code comments** highlighting key implementation details
- **Working demonstrations** that can be executed to see patterns in action

## Project Structure

```
JavaDesignPattern/
├── src/main/java/com/designpatterns/
│   ├── MainApp.java                    # Main demonstration application
│   ├── creational/                     # Creational Design Patterns
│   │   ├── singleton/SingletonDemo.java
│   │   ├── factory/FactoryMethodDemo.java
│   │   ├── abstractfactory/AbstractFactoryDemo.java
│   │   ├── builder/BuilderDemo.java
│   │   └── prototype/PrototypeDemo.java
│   ├── structural/                     # Structural Design Patterns
│   │   ├── adapter/AdapterDemo.java
│   │   ├── bridge/BridgeDemo.java
│   │   ├── composite/CompositeDemo.java
│   │   ├── decorator/DecoratorDemo.java
│   │   ├── facade/FacadeDemo.java
│   │   ├── flyweight/FlyweightDemo.java
│   │   └── proxy/ProxyDemo.java
│   └── behavioral/                     # Behavioral Design Patterns
│       ├── chainofresponsibility/ChainOfResponsibilityDemo.java
│       ├── command/CommandDemo.java
│       ├── iterator/IteratorDemo.java
│       ├── mediator/MediatorDemo.java
│       ├── memento/MementoDemo.java
│       ├── observer/ObserverDemo.java
│       ├── state/StateDemo.java
│       ├── strategy/StrategyDemo.java
│       ├── templatemethod/TemplateMethodDemo.java
│       └── visitor/VisitorDemo.java
├── pom.xml                            # Maven configuration
├── run.sh                             # Execution script
└── README.md                          # This file
```

## Quick Reference - Pattern Examples

### Creational Patterns
```java
// Singleton - One instance only
DatabaseConnection.getInstance().query("SELECT * FROM users");

// Factory Method - Create without specifying exact class
DocumentFactory factory = new WordFactory();
factory.openDocument(); // Creates WordDocument

// Abstract Factory - Create families of objects
UIFactory factory = new WindowsFactory();
Button btn = factory.createButton(); // Windows-style button

// Builder - Step-by-step construction
House house = new HouseBuilder()
    .setFoundation("Concrete")
    .setWalls("Brick")
    .setRoof("Tile")
    .build();

// Prototype - Clone existing objects
Shape circle = new Circle();
Shape clonedCircle = circle.clone();
```

### Structural Patterns
```java
// Adapter - Make incompatible interfaces work
ModernPrinter adapter = new PrinterAdapter(oldPrinter);
adapter.printDocument("Hello World!");

// Bridge - Separate abstraction from implementation
Shape redCircle = new Circle(new RedColor());
redCircle.draw();

// Composite - Tree structures
Component folder = new Folder("Documents");
folder.add(new File("resume.pdf"));
folder.display();

// Decorator - Add behavior dynamically
Coffee coffee = new MilkDecorator(new SimpleCoffee());
coffee.getDescription(); // "Simple Coffee, Milk"

// Facade - Simplified interface
HomeTheaterFacade theater = new HomeTheaterFacade();
theater.watchMovie("Inception");

// Flyweight - Share common data
Character c = CharacterFactory.getCharacter('A');
c.display(font, size);

// Proxy - Placeholder/surrogate
Image image = new ProxyImage("photo.jpg");
image.display(); // Loads only when needed
```

### Behavioral Patterns
```java
// Chain of Responsibility - Pass request along chain
Handler chain = new ConcreteHandler1();
chain.setNext(new ConcreteHandler2());
chain.handleRequest(request);

// Command - Encapsulate requests
Command command = new LightOnCommand(light);
RemoteControl remote = new RemoteControl();
remote.setCommand(command);
remote.pressButton();

// Iterator - Sequential access
Iterator<String> iter = collection.createIterator();
while (iter.hasNext()) {
    System.out.println(iter.next());
}

// Mediator - Define object interactions
ChatMediator mediator = new ChatRoom();
User user1 = new ConcreteUser(mediator, "Alice");
user1.send("Hello!");

// Memento - Capture/restore state
Memento memento = editor.save();
editor.restore(memento);

// Observer - Notify multiple objects
NewsAgency agency = new NewsAgency();
agency.attach(subscriber);
agency.setNews("Breaking news!"); // Notifies all

// State - Change behavior based on state
VendingMachine machine = new VendingMachine();
machine.insertCoin(); // Behavior depends on current state

// Strategy - Interchangeable algorithms
Context context = new Context(new ConcreteStrategyA());
context.executeStrategy();

// Template Method - Algorithm skeleton
DataProcessor processor = new CSVProcessor();
processor.process(); // Uses template with CSV-specific steps

// Visitor - Add operations without modifying
Visitor visitor = new ConcreteVisitor();
element.accept(visitor);
```

## Design Patterns Included

### Creational Patterns ✅
- **Singleton Pattern** - Ensures only one instance exists
- **Factory Method Pattern** - Creates objects without specifying exact classes
- **Abstract Factory Pattern** - Creates families of related objects
- **Builder Pattern** - Constructs complex objects step by step
- **Prototype Pattern** - Creates objects by cloning existing instances

### Structural Patterns ✅
- **Adapter Pattern** - Allows incompatible interfaces to work together
- **Bridge Pattern** - Separates abstraction from implementation
- **Composite Pattern** - Composes objects into tree structures
- **Decorator Pattern** - Adds behavior to objects dynamically
- **Facade Pattern** - Provides simplified interface to complex subsystem
- **Flyweight Pattern** - Minimizes memory usage by sharing common data
- **Proxy Pattern** - Provides placeholder/surrogate for another object

### Behavioral Patterns ✅
- **Chain of Responsibility Pattern** - Passes request along chain of handlers
- **Command Pattern** - Encapsulates requests as objects
- **Iterator Pattern** - Provides way to access elements sequentially
- **Mediator Pattern** - Defines how objects interact with each other
- **Memento Pattern** - Captures and restores object state
- **Observer Pattern** - Notifies multiple objects about state changes
- **State Pattern** - Changes object behavior based on internal state
- **Strategy Pattern** - Defines family of algorithms and makes them interchangeable
- **Template Method Pattern** - Defines skeleton of algorithm, subclasses fill in details
- **Visitor Pattern** - Adds new operations to objects without modifying them

## How to Run

### Prerequisites
- Java 8 or higher
- Maven (optional, for dependency management)

### Compilation and Execution

#### Using Java directly:
```bash
# Navigate to project directory
cd JavaDesignPattern

# Create target directory
mkdir -p target/classes

# Compile all Java files
find src -name "*.java" -exec javac -cp src/main/java -d target/classes {} +

# Run the main application
java -cp target/classes com.designpatterns.MainApp
```

#### Using Maven (if available):
```bash
# Compile the project
mvn clean compile

# Run the main application
mvn exec:java
```

## Key Features

### 1. Comprehensive Documentation
Every class includes detailed Javadoc comments explaining:
- Pattern purpose and benefits
- Implementation details
- Real-world use cases
- Code structure and relationships

### 2. Thread-Safe Implementations
Critical patterns like Singleton include thread-safe implementations with:
- Double-checked locking
- Volatile keywords for memory visibility
- Comprehensive thread safety demonstrations

### 3. Real-World Examples
Each pattern uses practical examples:
- **Singleton**: Database connections, configuration managers
- **Factory Method**: Restaurant burger creation system
- Clear analogies to real business scenarios

### 4. Educational Focus
The code is designed for learning with:
- Step-by-step explanations in comments
- Multiple demonstration scenarios
- Clear separation of pattern components
- Extensive cross-references between related classes

## Pattern Demonstrations

### All 23 Gang of Four Patterns
Each pattern includes:
- **Simple, focused examples** that demonstrate core concepts
- **Real-world analogies** (database connections, document creation, etc.)
- **Clear documentation** explaining when and why to use each pattern
- **Minimal code** that highlights the pattern's essence
- **Working demonstrations** showing the pattern in action

## Learning Objectives

After studying this code, you will understand:

1. **All 23 Design Patterns**: Complete coverage of Gang of Four patterns
2. **Pattern Recognition**: How to identify when to use each pattern
3. **Simple Implementations**: Clean, minimal code that focuses on core concepts
4. **Real-World Applications**: Practical examples and use cases
5. **Pattern Categories**: Understanding of Creational, Structural, and Behavioral patterns

## Best Practices Demonstrated

- **SOLID Principles**: Single Responsibility, Open/Closed, Dependency Inversion
- **Thread Safety**: Proper synchronization and memory visibility
- **Performance**: Optimizations like local variable caching
- **Documentation**: Comprehensive Javadoc with examples and cross-references
- **Code Organization**: Clear package structure and separation of concerns

## Contributing

This project serves as an educational resource. The patterns are implemented following best practices and include comprehensive documentation to aid learning.

## License

MIT License - Feel free to use this code for educational purposes.

## References

- Gang of Four: Design Patterns - Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software
- Effective Java by Joshua Bloch
- Head First Design Patterns
- Java Concurrency in Practice

---

**Note**: This project prioritizes educational value and code clarity over brevity. Each implementation includes extensive documentation to help developers understand not just *how* patterns work, but *why* and *when* to use them.

Commit message:

Add Gang of Four history and legacy section to README

README.md, after:

# Java Design Patterns Collection

A comprehensive collection of Java Design Patterns with detailed documentation and working examples.

## Overview

This project demonstrates the 23 Gang of Four Design Patterns with:
- **Detailed Javadoc documentation** explaining each pattern's purpose, structure, and benefits
- **Real-world examples** showing practical applications
- **Comprehensive code comments** highlighting key implementation details
- **Working demonstrations** that can be executed to see patterns in action

## The Gang of Four Legacy

In 1994, four software engineers - **Erich Gamma**, **Richard Helm**, **Ralph Johnson**, and **John Vlissides** - published "Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software," a groundbreaking book that would forever change how developers approach software design. Known collectively as the "Gang of Four" (GoF), they identified and catalogued 23 fundamental design patterns that had emerged from years of object-oriented programming practice.

### Why These Patterns Endure

Nearly three decades later, these patterns remain as relevant as ever because they address **fundamental problems in software design** that transcend specific technologies:

- **Timeless Design Challenges**: Issues like object creation, structural relationships, and behavioral interactions are inherent to software development
- **Language Agnostic**: While originally documented in C++ and Smalltalk, these patterns apply to any object-oriented language
- **Proven Solutions**: Each pattern represents a battle-tested solution refined through real-world application
- **Communication Tool**: They provide a common vocabulary for developers to discuss design decisions

### Modern Relevance

Today's frameworks and libraries extensively use these patterns:
- **Spring Framework**: Dependency Injection (Factory), AOP (Proxy), MVC (Observer)
- **Java Collections**: Iterator pattern for traversing collections
- **GUI Frameworks**: Observer pattern for event handling, Composite for UI hierarchies
- **Enterprise Applications**: Singleton for configuration, Factory for object creation, Strategy for algorithms

The Gang of Four didn't invent these patterns - they **discovered and documented** recurring solutions that skilled developers were already using. Their lasting contribution was recognizing that good design has patterns, and these patterns can be taught, learned, and applied systematically.

## Project Structure

```
JavaDesignPattern/
├── src/main/java/com/designpatterns/
│   ├── MainApp.java                    # Main demonstration application
│   ├── creational/                     # Creational Design Patterns
│   │   ├── singleton/SingletonDemo.java
│   │   ├── factory/FactoryMethodDemo.java
│   │   ├── abstractfactory/AbstractFactoryDemo.java
│   │   ├── builder/BuilderDemo.java
│   │   └── prototype/PrototypeDemo.java
│   ├── structural/                     # Structural Design Patterns
│   │   ├── adapter/AdapterDemo.java
│   │   ├── bridge/BridgeDemo.java
│   │   ├── composite/CompositeDemo.java
│   │   ├── decorator/DecoratorDemo.java
│   │   ├── facade/FacadeDemo.java
│   │   ├── flyweight/FlyweightDemo.java
│   │   └── proxy/ProxyDemo.java
│   └── behavioral/                     # Behavioral Design Patterns
│       ├── chainofresponsibility/ChainOfResponsibilityDemo.java
│       ├── command/CommandDemo.java
│       ├── iterator/IteratorDemo.java
│       ├── mediator/MediatorDemo.java
│       ├── memento/MementoDemo.java
│       ├── observer/ObserverDemo.java
│       ├── state/StateDemo.java
│       ├── strategy/StrategyDemo.java
│       ├── templatemethod/TemplateMethodDemo.java
│       └── visitor/VisitorDemo.java
├── pom.xml                            # Maven configuration
├── run.sh                             # Execution script
└── README.md                          # This file
```

## Quick Reference - Pattern Examples

### Creational Patterns
```java
// Singleton - One instance only
DatabaseConnection.getInstance().query("SELECT * FROM users");

// Factory Method - Create without specifying exact class
DocumentFactory factory = new WordFactory();
factory.openDocument(); // Creates WordDocument

// Abstract Factory - Create families of objects
UIFactory factory = new WindowsFactory();
Button btn = factory.createButton(); // Windows-style button

// Builder - Step-by-step construction
House house = new HouseBuilder()
    .setFoundation("Concrete")
    .setWalls("Brick")
    .setRoof("Tile")
    .build();

// Prototype - Clone existing objects
Shape circle = new Circle();
Shape clonedCircle = circle.clone();
```

### Structural Patterns
```java
// Adapter - Make incompatible interfaces work
ModernPrinter adapter = new PrinterAdapter(oldPrinter);
adapter.printDocument("Hello World!");

// Bridge - Separate abstraction from implementation
Shape redCircle = new Circle(new RedColor());
redCircle.draw();

// Composite - Tree structures
Component folder = new Folder("Documents");
folder.add(new File("resume.pdf"));
folder.display();

// Decorator - Add behavior dynamically
Coffee coffee = new MilkDecorator(new SimpleCoffee());
coffee.getDescription(); // "Simple Coffee, Milk"

// Facade - Simplified interface
HomeTheaterFacade theater = new HomeTheaterFacade();
theater.watchMovie("Inception");

// Flyweight - Share common data
Character c = CharacterFactory.getCharacter('A');
c.display(font, size);

// Proxy - Placeholder/surrogate
Image image = new ProxyImage("photo.jpg");
image.display(); // Loads only when needed
```

### Behavioral Patterns
```java
// Chain of Responsibility - Pass request along chain
Handler chain = new ConcreteHandler1();
chain.setNext(new ConcreteHandler2());
chain.handleRequest(request);

// Command - Encapsulate requests
Command command = new LightOnCommand(light);
RemoteControl remote = new RemoteControl();
remote.setCommand(command);
remote.pressButton();

// Iterator - Sequential access
Iterator<String> iter = collection.createIterator();
while (iter.hasNext()) {
    System.out.println(iter.next());
}

// Mediator - Define object interactions
ChatMediator mediator = new ChatRoom();
User user1 = new ConcreteUser(mediator, "Alice");
user1.send("Hello!");

// Memento - Capture/restore state
Memento memento = editor.save();
editor.restore(memento);

// Observer - Notify multiple objects
NewsAgency agency = new NewsAgency();
agency.attach(subscriber);
agency.setNews("Breaking news!"); // Notifies all

// State - Change behavior based on state
VendingMachine machine = new VendingMachine();
machine.insertCoin(); // Behavior depends on current state

// Strategy - Interchangeable algorithms
Context context = new Context(new ConcreteStrategyA());
context.executeStrategy();

// Template Method - Algorithm skeleton
DataProcessor processor = new CSVProcessor();
processor.process(); // Uses template with CSV-specific steps

// Visitor - Add operations without modifying
Visitor visitor = new ConcreteVisitor();
element.accept(visitor);
```

## Design Patterns Included

### Creational Patterns ✅
- **Singleton Pattern** - Ensures only one instance exists
- **Factory Method Pattern** - Creates objects without specifying exact classes
- **Abstract Factory Pattern** - Creates families of related objects
- **Builder Pattern** - Constructs complex objects step by step
- **Prototype Pattern** - Creates objects by cloning existing instances

### Structural Patterns ✅
- **Adapter Pattern** - Allows incompatible interfaces to work together
- **Bridge Pattern** - Separates abstraction from implementation
- **Composite Pattern** - Composes objects into tree structures
- **Decorator Pattern** - Adds behavior to objects dynamically
- **Facade Pattern** - Provides simplified interface to complex subsystem
- **Flyweight Pattern** - Minimizes memory usage by sharing common data
- **Proxy Pattern** - Provides placeholder/surrogate for another object

### Behavioral Patterns ✅
- **Chain of Responsibility Pattern** - Passes request along chain of handlers
- **Command Pattern** - Encapsulates requests as objects
- **Iterator Pattern** - Provides way to access elements sequentially
- **Mediator Pattern** - Defines how objects interact with each other
- **Memento Pattern** - Captures and restores object state
- **Observer Pattern** - Notifies multiple objects about state changes
- **State Pattern** - Changes object behavior based on internal state
- **Strategy Pattern** - Defines family of algorithms and makes them interchangeable
- **Template Method Pattern** - Defines skeleton of algorithm, subclasses fill in details
- **Visitor Pattern** - Adds new operations to objects without modifying them

## How to Run

### Prerequisites
- Java 8 or higher
- Maven (optional, for dependency management)

### Compilation and Execution

#### Using Java directly:
```bash
# Navigate to project directory
cd JavaDesignPattern

# Create target directory
mkdir -p target/classes

# Compile all Java files
find src -name "*.java" -exec javac -cp src/main/java -d target/classes {} +

# Run the main application
java -cp target/classes com.designpatterns.MainApp
```

#### Using Maven (if available):
```bash
# Compile the project
mvn clean compile

# Run the main application
mvn exec:java
```

## Key Features

### 1. Comprehensive Documentation
Every class includes detailed Javadoc comments explaining:
- Pattern purpose and benefits
- Implementation details
- Real-world use cases
- Code structure and relationships

### 2. Thread-Safe Implementations
Critical patterns like Singleton include thread-safe implementations with:
- Double-checked locking
- Volatile keywords for memory visibility
- Comprehensive thread safety demonstrations

### 3. Real-World Examples
Each pattern uses practical examples:
- **Singleton**: Database connections, configuration managers
- **Factory Method**: Restaurant burger creation system
- Clear analogies to real business scenarios

### 4. Educational Focus
The code is designed for learning with:
- Step-by-step explanations in comments
- Multiple demonstration scenarios
- Clear separation of pattern components
- Extensive cross-references between related classes

## Pattern Demonstrations

### All 23 Gang of Four Patterns
Each pattern includes:
- **Simple, focused examples** that demonstrate core concepts
- **Real-world analogies** (database connections, document creation, etc.)
- **Clear documentation** explaining when and why to use each pattern
- **Minimal code** that highlights the pattern's essence
- **Working demonstrations** showing the pattern in action

## Learning Objectives

After studying this code, you will understand:

1. **All 23 Design Patterns**: Complete coverage of Gang of Four patterns
2. **Pattern Recognition**: How to identify when to use each pattern
3. **Simple Implementations**: Clean, minimal code that focuses on core concepts
4. **Real-World Applications**: Practical examples and use cases
5. **Pattern Categories**: Understanding of Creational, Structural, and Behavioral patterns

## Best Practices Demonstrated

- **SOLID Principles**: Single Responsibility, Open/Closed, Dependency Inversion
- **Thread Safety**: Proper synchronization and memory visibility
- **Performance**: Optimizations like local variable caching
- **Documentation**: Comprehensive Javadoc with examples and cross-references
- **Code Organization**: Clear package structure and separation of concerns

## Contributing

This project serves as an educational resource. The patterns are implemented following best practices and include comprehensive documentation to aid learning.

## License

MIT License - Feel free to use this code for educational purposes.

## References

- **Gang of Four**: Design Patterns - Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software (1994) - *The original and definitive work*
- **Effective Java** by Joshua Bloch - *Modern Java best practices incorporating design patterns*
- **Head First Design Patterns** - *Accessible introduction with practical examples*
- **Java Concurrency in Practice** - *Thread-safe implementations of patterns*

---

**Note**: This project prioritizes educational value and code clarity over brevity. Each implementation includes extensive documentation to help developers understand not just *how* patterns work, but *why* and *when* to use them.
